water covers approximately 71% of
Earth's surface and its interaction with
the land can be significant in many of
these places we find tights but what
causes them and what impact do they have
on our lives and the places around us
[Music]
tights occur as a result of tractive
forces a gravitational battle between
the Sun Moon and Earth pulling in
different directions everybody doesn't
think about the Sun of the moon but
they're absolutely crucial to it when
we're working with a page how to see the
gravitational forces of both the moon
and the Sun creates tides as they pull
the Earth's water across the surface
towards them most areas therefore
experience too high and low tides every
day the tidal range is largest when high
tides are at their highest and low tides
are at their lowest when the Moon and
Sun line up which occurs during a new
moon and a full moon these are known as
spring tides when the Moon and Sun are
at right angles to each other in
relation to Earth the tidal range is
less these are known as neap tides the
changing sea level can have a dramatic
impact on the environment both in terms
of natural landscape and wildlife as
well as in human capacity the immediate
area that experiences these changing sea
levels has some fascinating flora and
fauna in what is known as the intertidal
zone
the intertidal zone is a really unique
part of the marine environment it's in
the area where the tide covers the shore
for part of the day so this means that
depending on how high up the shore the
animals and plants are they are
uncovered for varying amounts of time
the intertidal zone is actually one of
the most biodiverse marine habitats on
the planet it has ten times as much life
as your average bit of sea bed and
that's because there's lots of lots of
food availability there are over a
hundred different habitats that you find
here and the way habitats work on the
intertidal is that they change with
height so the further away you get from
the sea the less saltwater you get so
you get different species the
temperature is really variable so see it
can be really hot in a summer - really
really cold in the winter whereas in the
ocean itself the temperature is really
stable most land plants couldn't cope
with losing much of their water volume
at all whereas on the shore seaweeds are
all adapted so they can lose up to 90%
of the volume of their water for the
animals you've got two strategies
basically you can either run and hide or
you can clamp down really tight starfish
and quite a few of the snails and the
fish and crabs are the ones that run and
hide and then you've got the things that
aren't able to move so you're limpets
and your barnacles so their only choice
is to clamp down really tight at the
moment we're in the middle shore so
there's a range of species this one I'm
pointing to is a bead lerton enemy
they're specially adapted to cope with
desiccation by being completely enclosed
this is a dog walk and that's one of the
main predators of the mussels that are
on the rocks here and they've got what's
called a rasping tongue so their tongue
is a bit like sandpaper and they use it
to drill a hole into the mussel shell
and then they turn the mussel into a bit
of a suit with their stomach acid and
then they suck the mussel back up we're
into the lower Shore zone now and what
we're coming over here to have a look at
is a really nice ledge which has got a
pool running all the way along it then
because that never dries out there's
quite a variety of life that you don't
get on the open bits of rock in this
pool we can see quite a variety of
seaweeds in
the water here there's a lot of pink
Alvie there are actually called Coraline
alby's and they've got a structure
similar to coral and they're a bit more
delicate so that's why they're only
found in the rock pools this rock pool
you can see a whole collection of snake
clock and enemies these guys aren't able
to attract their tentacles so you only
find them in places that stay wet
throughout the whole tidal cycle so down
here we're now into the area that's
really only exposed on really big spring
tide so the big difference in this
community is you're starting to get
these big series called kelps this area
because it's got lots of nice crevices
you can see that there are a number of
starfish living so starfish their big
predators they are completely mobile
they can walk all over the shore but
they dry out really quickly so that's
why when the tides out like it is at the
moment they're tucked right into these
crevices this larger one is the spiny
starfish next to it we've got a much
smaller pushing starfish so these guys
tend to eat lots of mollusks and they
have a combined stomach and anus so it's
one hole for both jobs they empty their
stomach out on to whatever it is they're
trying to eat and the acid in their
stomach completely dissolves the muscle
and then they suffocate back up a bit
like a milkshake in Stiles own face is
quite a range of threats mostly human
related lots and lots of people want to
live and work in the coastline so that
can have impact the Coast is also a real
threat from climate change and ocean
acidification because it's already a
very extreme environment the animals and
plants are adapted to cope with that but
they're really at the limits of what
their biology can tolerate so theis
create opportunity for unique aspects of
nature to flourish but this environment
can be unpredictable coastal areas can
be an appealing prospect for many
visiting the beach the chance to swim in
the sea fishing or sailing but with
these activities there comes potential
danger if these tidal forces are
underestimated
we have Europe's biggest bay so this
fills up every 12 hours and then he
empties we get a ten point four meter
range of water coming in from zero to
ten point four meters at high water and
then it goes back out in six hours back
to low water again this is the Admiralty
charge of the area we have it positioned
here to help pinpoint where the capsule
to is but basically the yellow bit is
the LUNs green bits are the Sun banks
that dry out at low water on a spring
tide the blue bits of the shallow waters
and the white bits pretty deep water
this is higher than the inshore side so
the water comes in and floods this part
first and anybody in this area is
potentially very easily cut off the RNLI
is a volunteer life boat service
maintained from 297 stations around the
UK and the Republic of Ireland operating
at 24-hour rescue service 365 days a
year the tag comes in and obviously it
floods across the the law line parts of
the beaches first but furthered offshore
and especially in our area is where the
higher beaches are so the tide will come
in behind you and once it starts coming
in behind you
then obviously you're going to be cut
off the tide doesn't just come in it
races in at the top of the bay the tag
comes in quicker than a galloping horse
it's a you
speed so that's something that we've got
to watch as the tag goes out you can't
get cut off bait but what you can do
because it explores you know that the
modern the sand that's been underneath
of water that is very very soft now and
if you go into that mud then you're
going to get trapped into it into the
quicksand
and this is a major problem for s3 areas
if you have a look over on this side
here you can see where you've got
relatively hard standard dark sand
that's coming up and then it goes down
and it goes into very very sloppy sand
so it gets like a crust over it so it
looks nice and dry but it's literally
just the skin on a custard as soon as
you put your weight on the custard then
you just sink down into it from once of
a shake once it gets rounding these
realistically you've not got to do any
movement to talk because it will just go
worse and worse when you need to really
sit down onto the mud and attract
attention to yourself most important
thing is to respect the water know what
the tides doing and know that there's
perils of the tide just have to expose
the beach as well as when the tides
coming in everybody doesn't think about
this one on the moon but they're
absolutely crucial to us and we're
working with the how to think as well as
the threat tight and currents can pose
to people the action of waves crashing
against land can lead to some powerful
and destructive forces coastal erosion
the breaking down of land where it meets
the sea can be a real hazard putting
life LaHood's at risk from diminishing
beaches collapsing cliffs and the
gradual degradation of the coast so how
does this happen
and what can be done to protect against
it this is a really high energy area you
can see the pebbles around here and they
hit the defenses and rip
in 1977 there was a big breach of the
defenses in this area where we stood and
that flooded two and a half thousand
properties so after that the counsel at
the time constructed a seawall and which
has stood the test of time but it wasn't
particularly useful in terms of using
natural forces and taking the energy out
of things and that's why we've developed
this scheme when you first start a
scheme like this what you're trying to
do is understand what the environments
is doing to the coastline so the first
line of defense is always the beach then
look at the the rock element of this so
we then try to take out the energy as it
hits the the hard defenses these Rock
groins they work really well because
they allow energy to dissipate through
them as well as whereas the timber
groins tend to be reflective each
individual Rock has been weighed each
individual Rock has been placed using a
GPS locator the important bit really is
the gaps between them as well so you've
got a solid unit but it's the gaps which
take out the energy when we get storms
we get rocks of this sort of size being
thrown up and you can imagine one of
these being thrown up onto the concrete
and it causes quite a lot of damage and
that's what was happening in the
previous schemes we still get rocks of
this size being thrown up onto the
defense's but only onto this lower area
and the idea is that the energy is taken
out and as we go further up the defenses
it becomes less energy and so you just
get water thrown up there and we get
very little on the upper promenade the
other side of it is looking at the
environment and how it how that defence
interacts with that environment you can
put concrete walls and big - elements up
but that doesn't react with the
environment well and you don't get the
biodiversity that we get on this scheme
so we we're starting to encourage
animals to live here
the rocky groins provide loads of little
nooks and crannies that things can
settle into just a power deck surface
that things like barnacles will set
along to more easily we get lots of
interesting animals in the tidal pools
that are formed by the groins common
prawns and gobies and blennies or shawl
crabs
we found lots of muscles as well so
there's mussel beds out here in the bay
we get lots of interesting animals
living within the sediment as well on
the beach so and we get a lot of
lugworms
and rag worms and little beach hoppers
it's such a nutrient-rich environment
around here just an incredible area
ecologically part of the the whole
scheme was to upgrade this whole
language site and create a better place
for nature and the emphasis was on
create it and they will come the
grassland species and the flowers that
were here were seeds collected and then
they were sent away for propagation
which created a turf and when the sea
defense works and the engineering was
finished that turf got relayed onto this
site to keep its biological heritage
status the old site had a concrete swale
running the whole length of this site to
catch any water that was overtop from
storms and stuff like that and was not
nice to look at was quite unpleasant
and what what has happened the whole
site has been re profile lovely pathways
have been put in and a couple of dipping
pools as well also further along we've
created hibernaculum so areas for newts
and toads to hibernate over winter
already we have discovered a number of
species of flowers that have not been
seen locally in Lancashire for a long
time insects and butterflies and various
other species that hopefully we will be
surveying for it and finding in in years
to come
other things that we did right at the
outset was to consult with our residents
to see what sort of they wanted to see
from the new defenses that we were going
to put in place and one of the features
that they came forward with was they
wanted easy access from their homes on
on the roads and they wanted to be able
to access the beach as well public
engagement is such an important tool for
conservation yeah particularly when
we're working with children and children
just absolutely love marine wildlife and
getting out on the beach and you know
when they first learn about I don't know
mermaids purses which have shark and Ray
egg cases they just find it incredible
that you know they're like oh that was a
baby shark inside this and now it's
washed up on the beach over 7,000 homes
were protected by the scheme if we did
have flooding in this area not only
would people be affected in the homes
because they are below sea level but
also another massive effect on the
infrastructure and the life of the whole
of the borough so the gravitational
battle taking place between celestial
bodies can have a powerful and
significant effect on life on Earth they
bring challenges for human survival but
also opportunities for nature to evolve
and thrive whilst also shaping the
planet around us and these are just some
of the ways that we experience the
incredible power and effects of space on
earth
[Music]
you